Add Android blog post answering common questions and sharing more links and info (#1249)
apple/swift-org-website: _posts/2025-12-18-exploring-the-swift-sdk-for-android.md

---
layout: new-layouts/post
published: false
date: 2025-12-18 10:00:00
title: "Exploring the Swift SDK for Android"
author: android-workgroup
category: "Developer Tools"
---

Since the announcement of [the preview Swift SDK for Android](/blog/nightly-swift-sdk-for-android/),

> the Android workgroup has seen a lot of questions about how it works and what's next.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Android workgroup has seen a lot of interest in how it works and what's next.
```

Reviewer: Not 100% necessary, but the following sentence says "questions" so this adds a bit of variety to the prose and also gives a positive framing "interest" versus questions which may have negative connotations.

future, and try out the new Swift 6.3 SDK nightly previews.

## How Swift works on Android

Swift compiles directly to native machine code on Android, the same way it does on most
other platforms. This approach produces similar performance to C and C++ code built using the
Android Native Development Kit (NDK), while achieving a happier balance between performance,
safety, and usability. To make this possible, Swift apps on Android bundle a native runtime
that implements many of its features, including its standard library and core
libraries, like Dispatch and [Foundation](/blog/foundation-preview-now-available/).

However, since most Android APIs are only made available through Java and Kotlin,
Swift must call into the Android Runtime (ART). That is where the [Java interoperability
project's](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-java) `jextract` and `wrap-java`
tools come in. These tools automatically create bindings that enable you to call
Swift from Java or go the other way using the Java Native Interface (JNI), which
allows Swift to seamlessly integrate with the Android platform.

The [`jextract` tool gained a JNI mode this summer](/blog/gsoc-2025-showcase-swift-java/):

> you can watch its author Mads Odgaard's [Server Side Swift Conference talk from a couple months ago](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tOH6V1IvTAc)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can watch its author Mads Odgaard's [Server-Side Swift Conference talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tOH6V1IvTAc)
```

> and try out [the new weather app he submitted in the Android examples repository](

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and try out the [example weather app](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-android-examples/tree/main/swift-java-weather-app) he submitted in the Android examples repository].
```

we need to expand and test it more and make it easy to configure and access. That will likely
mean tying the debugger and [Swift Language Server Protocol tool, sourcekit-lsp](/blog/gsoc-2025-showcase-code-completion/),
into Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) like [Visual Studio Code](/blog/gsoc-2025-showcase-swiftly-support-in-vscode/)
and Android Studio, another issue on our board.

[An Android workflow](https://github.com/swiftlang/github-workflows/pull/172) was
added to the official Swift workflows for GitHub months ago, allowing you to easily
try building your Swift packages with the Swift SDK for Android, and work is underway to let you
[run your tests in an Android emulator](https://github.com/swiftlang/github-workflows/pull/215)
too.

We are looking to onboard more contributors and have set up [a video call this
weekend to discuss](https://forums.swift.org/t/swift-on-android-new-contributors-call/83729).
We hope to make these contributor calls a recurring event moving forward, as more people
pitch in to improve these Swift tools themselves.

## Sharing Logic Versus Sharing UI

Swift allows you to target many platforms with the same business logic, and Swift

> on Android expands that much more, but we do not provide a cross-platform GUI toolkit.

Reviewer: right now the mention of not providing a cross-platform GUI toolkit is spread across two sentences. going to suggest an edit to combine these statement so it's simpler and clearer.

> As we write in [our draft vision document](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/blob/807b844be42db582e434d1667fc907ae7a7a8775/visions/android.md),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we shared in [our draft vision document](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/blob/807b844be42db582e434d1667fc907ae7a7a8775/visions/android.md),
```

the Android workgroup has no plans to create such a GUI toolkit, but will instead
curate a list of cross-platform UI tools from the community.

> See [our recent post in the Swift forums](https://forums.swift.org/t/swift-gui-toolkits-for-android/83337)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our [recent post in the Swift forums](https://forums.swift.org/t/swift-gui-toolkits-for-android/83337)
```

other platforms. This approach produces similar performance to C and C++ code built using the
Android Native Development Kit (NDK), while achieving a happier balance between performance,
safety, and usability. To make this possible, Swift apps on Android bundle a native runtime
that implements many of its features, including its standard library and core
libraries, like Dispatch and [Foundation](/blog/foundation-preview-now-available/).

However, since most Android APIs are only made available through Java and Kotlin,
Swift must call into the Android Runtime (ART). That is where the [Java interoperability
project's](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-java) `jextract` and `wrap-java`
tools come in. These tools automatically create bindings that enable you to call
Swift from Java or go the other way using the Java Native Interface (JNI), which
allows Swift to seamlessly integrate with the Android platform.

The [`jextract` tool gained a JNI mode this summer](/blog/gsoc-2025-showcase-swift-java/):
you can now watch its author Mads Odgaard's [Server Side Swift Conference talk from a couple months ago](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tOH6V1IvTAc)

> and try out [his new weather example app in the Android examples repository](

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and try out [the new weather example app in the Android examples repository](
```

It's true that it's "his" example, but more than that, it is a Swift project example, so I'd phrase it as "the example"

Author: He wrote it, so giving him credit, but don't really care 🤷‍♂️

Author: Changed this to "the new weather example app he submitted in," which gives him credit and indicates to readers that it is worth perusing, since it came from the main JNI guy.

## Ongoing work

Grassroots community efforts to run Swift on Android [began as soon as the language source was opened in 2015](https://lists.swift.org/pipermail/swift-dev/Week-of-Mon-20151207/000171.html),
and continue to this day. [The Android project board lists areas the workgroup determines important](https://github.com/orgs/swiftlang/projects/17),
such as easy debugging, now a high priority for us. While it [may work for small examples](https://github.com/swiftlang/llvm-project/issues/10831),
we need to expand and test it more and make it easy to configure and access. That will likely
mean tying the debugger and [Swift Language Server Protocol tool, sourcekit-lsp](/blog/gsoc-2025-showcase-code-completion/),
into Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) like [Visual Studio Code](/blog/gsoc-2025-showcase-swiftly-support-in-vscode/)
and Android Studio, another issue on our board.

[An Android workflow](https://github.com/swiftlang/github-workflows/pull/172) was
added to the official Swift workflows for GitHub months ago, allowing you to easily

> try building your Swift packages with the Swift SDK for Android, and work is underway to let you

Author: It might, see #1198

curate a list of cross-platform UI tools from the community.

See [our recent post in the Swift forums](https://forums.swift.org/t/swift-gui-toolkits-for-android/83337)
that lists a handful of popular and in-progress options a preliminary search found, but
which we have not yet validated regarding what their authors claim. We will work with
those devs in the coming months to add more info on using their GUI tools with the Swift
SDK for Android.

## Android API versioning

Until recently, Swift on Android did not support targeting multiple Android API levels
in the same app, but recent preview releases bring the familiar `@available`
attribute and `#available` runtime check that you know from Apple platforms to Android:

```swift
#if canImport(Android)
import Android
import Dispatch
#endif

@available(Android 33, *)
func backtrace() {
    withUnsafeTemporaryAllocation(of: UnsafeMutableRawPointer.self, capacity: 1) { address in
        _ = backtrace(address.baseAddress!, 1)
    }
}

@available(Android 35, *)
func hello35() {
    print("Hello from API 35")
}

@available(Android 27, *)
func hello27() {
    print("Hello, world!")

> }

Reviewer 2: It's probably enough to just showcase one method to get the point across

@main
struct ExecutableDemo {

    static func main() {
        #if os(Android)
          hello27()
          if #available(Android 33, *) {
            backtrace()
            print("Hello from Android API 33+")
            if #available(Android 35, *) {
              hello35()
            }
          }
        #endif
    }
}
```

> (editor: should we slim this down?)

Author: Slimmed it down to only check one API level at runtime

Try this new feature out on Android and let us know how it is working for you.

## Learn from the community

Those using Swift on Android for many years have been sharing their experiences,
as path-breakers like [Readdle](https://readdle.com/blog/swift-for-android-our-experience-and-tools)
and [Flowkey](https://medium.com/@ephemer/why-we-put-an-app-in-the-android-play-store-using-swift-96ac87c88dfc)
have written about their work for the last decade.

The Left Bit's Pierluigi Cifani [wrote about their experiences recently](https://forums.swift.org/t/thoughts-on-swift-for-android/80961),
gave [a great talk at NSSpain 2025 a couple months ago](https://youtu.be/EIGl6GOo210),
and was [interviewed by Swift Toolkit last month](https://www.swifttoolkit.dev/posts/dc-pier).

A [community member recently contributed an example app](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-android-examples/pull/24)
that builds C++ using CMake and links it with Swift, using Swift's automated JNI bridging

> to Java instead. (editor: not sure we will get this in, but might be a good example to highlight for some)

Reviewer 2: ~~There's also the https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-android-examples/pull/25 which showcases bi-directional uses with swift-java, perhaps this section should become a "check our latest examples"?~~ 

Oh, I see it is linked above, that's ok
